# onagilitity

Agility is freedom and a challenge in developing and delivering solutions to our customers. It is an opportunity for employees for the trust and freedom management (or Enablement like we call it in lexoffice) bestows upon us to do the right thing  by letting the people on the field make the decision that impact the customer the most. But agility is also a challenge not only because of the accountability that the given trust and freedom bring along themselves, but also because Agility is to some degree counterintuitive to what the human brain wants. This is, partly, what makes agile work so difficult. Agile calls for disbelief in status and certainty. Moreover, continuous inspection and adaption requires a great amount of creative discipline and disciplined action from Enablement and the people on the field.

I want to take Scrum for a moment to illustrate two points. Solutions are created in the Backlog’s refinement meetings. Working on a MVP or MVF is difficult because the answer to the question “it is good enough?” can ultimately only be answered by customers. For Product Owner without technical background it might be hard to realise that the V in MVx also means viable security, stability and a low technical debt. All of the Product Owner have worked with truly dislike revisiting a feature only for technical sake. A development team must push back during the refinement meeting to ensure that the scrum team as a clear and common understanding and agreement of the security, stability and technical debt of the MVx been discussed. Now, outside of Scrum this can be formulate that in MVP or MVF and its tradeoff between business value and technical craftsmanship has to be agree upon before the first line of code is written. In other words understand the problem and most of the rest will follow. That is the creative discipline part.

It is in the interation cycle where displined action is exercised by the development team. The gold standard for me of good development is Extreme Programming. Moreoever, judicious use of Trunk Based Development and Feature Toggles might accelerate the integration and deployment pipeline. But I think this is only sustanable in mature teams. 

Speaking of which, the more I do Scrum, the more I feel it can be a obstacle for very advanced teams. As it is known from Extreme Programming, the Product Owner is a proxy the custom. But it is not the custom. The role and tasks of the Scrum Master can be distributed among the development team. This leads me to concept of roles and micro-roles of a developer. 
